---
layout: post
title:  "6 Trends in AI to expect"
author: Vibhu Kulkarni
categories: Trends
# cover:  "/assets/instacode.png"
# permalink: /firstPost/
tags: trends
---
What is happening in the field of AI? What can one expect to see happen in the coming year? 

The previous decade was one where a machine truly became intelligent, what can we expect from the next decade especially the year 2020? One cannot necessarily predict what will happen specifically but there are somethings to keep an eye out for. This article thus includes some AI events to lookout for in the year 2020

## AI in healthcare
Earlier this year, Google’s DeepMind Health AI was able to diagnose breast cancer more accurately than radiologists. This is a huge accomplishment which shows how valuable AI could be in medical diagnostics. DeepMind Health is constantly improving and combines neuroscience with machine learning in an attempt to mimic the human brain. With these kinds of developments, DeepMind Health could be a game changer in healthcare.

Chatbots and AI are shaping the future of online customer service, but companies such as Gyant are adapting this technology to provide medical advice chatbots, which can use patients’ data to give personalised medical advice. 

AI has the potential to transform healthcare and more healthcare professionals are starting to see this, so we can expect to see AI having major impacts in healthcare this year. 

## AI in surveillance

Facial recognition has been in use for years now, even on our smartphones. But combining it with AI is having huge impacts in surveillance. AI is giving brains to the eyes of the surveillance cameras.

IC Realtime is a company front-lining this development, having developed an AI called web app called Ella. Ella can analyse live video and make it instantly searchable. Users are able to search endless footage to find clips with specific animals, car models or even people with certain colours of clothes.

## Deepfakes

On a slightly more worrying note, Deepfakes have seen huge development in recent years. Deepfakes are amazingly realistic pieces of media generated by deep learning AI. The AI is given data, perhaps in the form of a video recording showing a person’s face and voice and is able to create synthetic media of that person doing or saying something that they haven’t.

At this moment, we can usually tell when something is a deepfake, but they are becoming alarmingly realistic. Below is a snippet taken from a YouTube video, where the creator was able to superimpose Sylvester Stallone’s face over Arnold Schwarzenegger for an entire deepfake scene of Terminator 2.


This new technology could give an entirely new dimension to fake news and has the potential to ruin reputations.

## Will we even know we interact with AI?

One of the things to look out for in 2020 is to not even realize that you interact with AI! As bizarre as it sounds it is something to expect. That we won’t even know if what we are interacting with is an AI. Huge investment is being made into Natural Language Processing (NLP) which results in the increase of datasets as well as the efficiency of the algorithms resulting in the AI matching our speech patterns and imitate it. Imagine an AI being sarcastic to you! 

## Operational Analytics

We will begin to see companies combining different AI components at different times in the analytics lifecycle to come up with better suggestions and insights for their business. AI today can facilitate a specific purpose. It can thus help with the transparency behind the analytics and help discovering new insights and revealing a data story. AI can thus help get a strong solution and provide interesting insights.  


### Mistakes made by AI as well as discrimination faced by it 

AI is not perfect. One can expect it to make mistakes. Its mistakes could affect companies business operations as well as its reputation. AI can also face discrimination – it already faces some. The spread of deepfakes, overuse of personalisation can offend and creep out the users. 

<br>
<br>

As AI gets bigger in 2020, the chances of this happening increase as well and hence it is something one can expect to happen. 
